---
lastrevid: 585980528
pageid: 30556018
canonicalurl: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parabolic_geometry_(differential_geometry)
title: Parabolic geometry (differential geometry)
editurl: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parabolic_geometry_(differential_geometry)&action=edit
length: 3041
contentmodel: wikitext
pagelanguage: en
touched: 2015-02-14T13:05:20Z
ns: 0
fullurl: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parabolic_geometry_(differential_geometry)
---

In [[differential geometry]] and the study of [[Lie group]]s, a '''parabolic geometry''' is a [[homogeneous space]] ''G''/''P'' which is the quotient of a [[semisimple Lie group]] ''G'' by a [[parabolic subgroup]] ''P''.  More generally, the curved analogs of a parabolic geometry in this sense is also called a parabolic geometry: any geometry that is modeled on such a space by means of a [[Cartan connection]].

== Examples ==
The [[projective space]] ''P''<sup>''n''</sup> is an example.  It is the homogeneous space PGL(''n''+1)/''H'' where ''H'' is the isotropy group of a line.  In this geometrical space, the notion of a straight line is meaningful, but there is no preferred ("affine") parameter along the lines.  The curved analog of projective space is a manifold in which the notion of a [[geodesic]] makes sense, but for which there are no preferred parametrizations on those geodesics.  A [[projective connection]] is the relevant Cartan connection that gives a means for describing a projective geometry by gluing copies of the projective space to the tangent spaces of the base manifold.  Broadly speaking, [[projective geometry]] refers to the study of manifolds with this kind of connection.

Another example is the [[conformal geometry|conformal sphere]].  Topologically, it is the ''n''-sphere, but there is no notion of length defined on it, just of angle between curves.  Equivalently, this geometry is described as an equivalence class of [[Riemannian metric]]s on the sphere (called a conformal class).  The group of transformations that preserve angles on the sphere is the [[Lorentz group]] O(''n''+1,1), and so ''S''<sup>''n''</sup> = O(''n''+1,1)/''P''.  [[Conformal geometry]] is, more broadly, the study of manifolds with a conformal equivalence class of Riemannian metrics, i.e., manifolds modeled on the conformal sphere.  Here the associated Cartan connection is the [[conformal connection]].

Other examples include:
* [[CR geometry]], the study of manifolds modeled on a real hyperquadric <math>Q^{2(p+q)-1} = SU(p,q)/P \subseteq \mathbb{C}^{p+q}</math>, where <math>P</math> is the stabilizer of an isotropic line (see [[CR manifold]])

* contact projective geometry, the study of manifolds modeled on <math>SP(n)/P</math> where <math>P</math> is that subgroup of the [[symplectic group]] stabilizing the line generated by the first standard basis vector in <math> \mathbb{R}^{2n}</math>

==References==
* {{Citation | last1=Čap | |first1=Andreas | authorlink=Andreas Čap | last2=Slovák | first2=Jan |
title=Parabolic Geometries: Background and general theory | publisher=AMS | year=2009 | url=http://books.google.com/books/about/Parabolic_Geometries_Background_and_gene.html?id=G4Ot397nWsQC | isbn=978-0-8218-2681-2}}
* Slovak, J. [http://www.math.muni.cz/~slovak/ftp/papers/drsc.ps Parabolic Geometries], Research Lecture Notes, Part of DrSc-dissertation, Masaryk University, 1997, 70pp, IGA Preprint 97/11 (University of Adelaide) 

[[Category:Differential geometry]]
[[Category:Homogeneous spaces]]