---
lastrevid: 644863946
pageid: 737087
canonicalurl: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toric_variety
title: Toric variety
editurl: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Toric_variety&action=edit
length: 8781
contentmodel: wikitext
pagelanguage: en
touched: 2015-02-14T13:05:20Z
ns: 0
fullurl: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toric_variety
---

In [[algebraic geometry]], a '''toric variety''' or '''torus embedding''' is an [[algebraic variety]] containing an [[algebraic torus]] as an open [[dense subset]], such that the [[group action|action]] of the torus on itself extends to the whole variety. Some authors also require it to be [[normal variety|normal]]. Toric varieties form an important and rich class of examples in algebraic geometry, which often provide a testing ground for theorems. The geometry of a toric variety is fully determined by the combinatorics of its associated fan, which often makes computations far more tractable. For a certain special, but still quite general class of toric varieties, this information is also encoded in a polytope, which creates a powerful connection of the subject with convex geometry. Familiar examples of toric varieties are affine space, projective spaces, products of projective spaces and bundles over projective space. 

==Toric Varieties from Tori==

The original motivation to study toric varieties was to study torus embeddings. Given the algebraic torus ''T'', the group of characters Hom(''T'','''C'''<sup>x</sup>) forms a lattice. Given a collection of points ''A'', a subset of this lattice, each point determines a map to '''C''' and thus the collection determines a map to '''C'''<sup>|A|</sup>. By taking the Zariski closure of the image of such a map, one obtains an affine variety. If the collection of lattice points ''A'' generates the character lattice, this variety is a torus embedding. In similar fashion one may produce a parametrized projective toric variety, by taking the projective closure of the above map, viewing it as a map into an affine patch of projective space. 

Given a projective toric variety, observe that we may probe its geometry by one-parameter subgroups. Each one parameter subgroup, determined by a point in the lattice, dual to the character lattice, is a punctured curve inside the projective toric variety. Since the variety is compact, this punctured curve has a unique limit points. Thus, by partitioning the one-parameter subgroup lattice by the limit points of punctured curves, we obtain a lattice fan, a collection of polyhedral rational cones. The cones of highest dimension correspond precisely to the torus fixed points, the limits of these punctured curves.

==The Toric Variety of a Fan==

Suppose that ''N'' is a finite-rank [[free abelian group]].  A strongly convex rational polyhedral cone in ''N'' is a [[convex cone]] (of the real vector space of ''N'') with apex at the origin, generated by a finite number of vectors of ''N'', that contains no line through the origin.  These will be called "cones" for short.

For each cone σ its affine toric variety ''U''<sub>σ</sub> is the spectrum of the [[semigroup algebra]] of the [[dual cone]].

A '''fan''' is a collection of cones closed under taking intersections and faces.

The toric variety of a fan is given by taking the affine toric varieties of its cones and gluing them together by identifying ''U''<sub>σ</sub> with an open subvariety of ''U''<sub>τ</sub> whenever σ is a face of τ. Conversely, every fan of strongly convex rational cones has an associated toric variety.

The fan associated with a toric variety condenses some important data about the variety. For example, a variety is [[smooth scheme|smooth]] if every cone in its fan can be generated by a subset of a [[basis (universal algebra)|basis]] for the free abelian group ''N''.

==Morphisms of Toric Varieties==

Suppose that Δ<sub>1</sub> and Δ<sub>2</sub> are fans in lattices ''N''<sub>1</sub> and ''N''<sub>2</sub>. If ''f'' is a linear map from ''N''<sub>1</sub> to ''N''<sub>2</sub> such that the image of every cone of Δ<sub>1</sub> is contained in a cone of Δ<sub>2</sub>, then ''f'' induces a morphism ''f''<sub>*</sub> between the corresponding toric varieties. This map ''f''<sub>*</sub> is proper if and only if the map ''f'' maps |Δ<sub>1</sub>| onto |Δ<sub>2</sub>|, where |Δ| is the underlying space of a fan Δ given by the union of its cones.

==Resolution of Singularities==

A toric variety is nonsingular if its cones of maximal dimension are generated by a basis of the lattice.
This implies that every toric variety has a [[resolution of singularities]] given by another toric variety, which can be constructed by subdividing the maximal cones into cones of nonsingular toric varieties.

==The Toric Variety of a Convex Polytope==
The fan of a rational convex polytope in ''N'' consists of the cones over its proper faces. The toric variety of the polytope is the toric variety of its fan. A variation of this construction is to take a rational polytope in the dual of ''N'' and take the toric variety of its polar set in ''N''.

The toric variety has a map to the polytope in the dual of ''N'' whose fibers are topological tori.  For example, the [[complex projective plane]] '''CP'''<sup>2</sup> may be represented by three complex coordinates satisfying

:<math>|z_1|^2+|z_2|^2+|z_3|^2 = 1 , \,\!</math>

where the sum has been chosen to account for the real rescaling part of the projective map, and the coordinates must be moreover identified by the following [[U(1)]] action:

:<math>(z_1,z_2,z_3)\approx e^{i\phi} (z_1,z_2,z_3) . \,\!</math>

The approach of toric geometry is to write

:<math>(x,y,z) = (|z_1|^2,|z_2|^2,|z_3|^2) . \,\!</math>

The coordinates <math>x,y,z</math> are non-negative, and they parameterize a triangle because

:<math>x+y+z=1 ; \,\! </math>
that is,
:<math>\quad z=1-x-y . \,\!</math>

The triangle is the '''toric base''' of the complex projective plane. The generic fiber is a two-torus parameterized by the phases of <math>z_1,z_2</math>; the phase of <math>z_3</math> can be chosen real and positive by the <math>U(1)</math> symmetry.

However, the two-torus degenerates into three different circles on the boundary of the triangle i.e. at <math>x=0</math> or <math>y=0</math> or <math>z=0</math> because the phase of <math>z_1,z_2,z_3</math> becomes inconsequential, respectively.

The precise orientation of the circles within the torus is usually depicted by the slope of the line intervals (the sides of the triangle, in this case).

== Relation to Mirror Symmetry ==
The idea of toric varieties is useful for [[mirror symmetry (string theory)|mirror symmetry]] because an interpretation of certain data of a fan as data of a polytope leads to a geometric construction of mirror manifolds.

==References==
*{{Citation | last1=Cox | first1=David | author1-link=David Cox (mathematician)| title=Topics in algebraic geometry and geometric modeling | url=http://www3.amherst.edu/~dacox/ | publisher=Amer. Math. Soc. | location=Providence, R.I. | series=Contemp. Math. | mr=2039974  | year=2003 | volume=334 | chapter=What is a toric variety? | pages=203–223}}
*{{citation| first=David A. |last=Cox
|first2=John B. |last2=Little
|first3=Hal |last3=Schenck
|title=Toric varieties |url=http://www.cs.amherst.edu/~dac/toric.html}}
*{{Citation | last1=Danilov | first1=V. I. | title=The geometry of toric varieties | mr=495499  | year=1978 | journal=Akademiya Nauk SSSR i Moskovskoe Matematicheskoe Obshchestvo. Uspekhi Matematicheskikh Nauk | issn=0042-1316 | volume=33 | issue=2 | pages=85–134 |doi=	10.1070/RM1978v033n02ABEH002305}}
* {{Citation | last1=Fulton | first1=William | author1-link=William Fulton (mathematician) | title=Introduction to toric varieties | publisher=[[Princeton University Press]] | isbn=978-0-691-00049-7 | year=1993}}
*{{Citation | last1=Kempf | first1=G. | last2=Knudsen | first2=Finn Faye | last3=Mumford | first3=David | author3-link=David Mumford | last4=Saint-Donat | first4=B. | title=Toroidal embeddings. I | publisher=[[Springer-Verlag]] | location=Berlin, New York | series=Lecture Notes in Mathematics | doi=	10.1007/BFb0070318 | mr=0335518  | year=1973 | volume=339}}
*{{Citation | last1=Miller | first1=Ezra | title=What is ... a toric variety? | url=http://www.ams.org/notices/200805/tx080500586p.pdf | mr=2404030  | year=2008 | journal=[[Notices of the American Mathematical Society]] | issn=0002-9920 | volume=55 | issue=5 | pages=586–587}}
*{{Citation | last1=Oda | first1=Tadao | title=Convex bodies and algebraic geometry | publisher=[[Springer-Verlag]] | location=Berlin, New York | series=Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas (3)] | isbn=978-3-540-17600-8 | mr=922894  | year=1988 | volume=15}}

==External links==
* [http://www3.amherst.edu/~dacox/ Home page] of D. A. Cox, with several lectures on toric varieties

== See also ==
*[[toric ideal]]
*[[toric stack]] (roughly this is obtained by replacing the step of taking a [[GIT quotient]] by a [[quotient stack]])

[[Category:Algebraic geometry]]